% This file is part of CWEB.
% The CWEB programs by Silvio Levy are based on programs by D. E. Knuth.
% They are distributed WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY, express or implied.
% This README file last updated October 1992 by Don Knuth

% Copyright (C) 1987,1990,1992 Silvio Levy and Donald E. Knuth

% Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
% document provided that the copyright notice and this permission notice
% are preserved on all copies.

% Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
% document under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
% entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
% permission notice identical to this one.

% Please send comments, suggestions, etc. to levy@math.berkeley.edu.

This directory contains the following files:

Makefile
README
common-man.ch
common-vms.ch
common.c
common.h
common.w
ctangle-man.ch
ctangle-vms.ch
ctangle.c
ctangle.w
cweave-man.ch
cweave-vms.ch
cweave.w
cweb.1
cweb.el
cwebmac.tex
cwebman.tex
examples/
prod.w

(If you got cweb by mail, you may have cweave.w.1 and cweave.w.2
instead of cweave.w.  The first thing to say then is

cat cweave.w.[12] > cweave.w

)

The file cwebman.tex is the user manual.
The examples directory contains additional examples of the use of CWEB.
The files common.c and ctangle.c are used for bootstrapping.
The file cweb.1 is a manual page.
The file cweb.el is suggested for GNU-Emacs users.
The files *-vms.ch are sample change files for local customization.
The files *-man.ch are used if you want to make the full 205-page CWEB manual.

IMPORTANT: Please touch *.c before proceeding.
Then edit the opening lines of Makefile so that it has the proper
directory information for your local system.

To make ctangle and cweave say `make all'; this should produce the
following actions (possibly with harmless warning messages from cc):

cc -g -DDEBUG -DSTAT -w -c ctangle.c
cc -g -DDEBUG -DSTAT -w -c common.c
cc -g -DDEBUG -DSTAT -w -o ctangle ctangle.o common.o 
./ctangle cweave
cc -g -DDEBUG -DSTAT -w -c cweave.c
cc -g -DDEBUG -DSTAT -w -o cweave cweave.o common.o

To get some reassurance that things are OK, you can say `make cautiously',
which ensures that CTANGLE will reproduce itself. (Otherwise the source
files common.w and ctangle.w won't actually have been used.)

To install cweave and ctangle say `make install'.

Note that change files for vms are provided.  When you are first bootstrapping
to a new system, you may need to edit common.c and ctangle.c by hand, but
the vast majority of the change-file changes are minor refinements
that are not necessary for a rudimentary ctangle.
